==== NEW TO ADD ====

	With the profits of his sale of a new dry cell battery patent to the Packard Motor Car Company in 1905, a twenty-one year old Hugo Gernsback formed the Electro Importing Company, an importer of specialized electrical equipment from Europe and the first mail-order radio house in the country.  Through their catalog and retail store on 84 West Broadway, the company provided access to specialized wireless and electrical equipment not found anywhere outside of Europe.  Electro Importing catered to a diverse clientele, providing their more advanced basement experimenters with the first vacuum tube offered for sale to the general public in 1911, and manufacturing for their novice users the first fully assembled wireless set commercially available in late 1905, the aforementioned Telimco.
	After several issues of their mail order catalog and a growing subscription list, Electro Importing began including features, editorials, and letters to the editor.  Between 1906 and 1910, the catalog grew into a series of monthly magazines for the wireless homebrewer, beginning with Modern Electrics in 1908 and the offshoot Experimenter Publishing Company in 1915.  The transition from the mail-order catalog to the ‘slick paper’ monthly magazine format was a smooth one, evidenced by the fact that the third edition (1908) of the Electro Importing catalog bears the title of the new full-format magazine, “Modern Electrics.”  While Modern Electrics still advertised the equipment Electro Importing offered for sale in a familiar grid layout with ordering instructions, it also included feature articles detailing the latest research into experimental media technologies in America, Germany, France, and in Gernsback’s own company offices.  Regular reporters like H. Winfield Secor and René Homer, celebrity guest contributors such as Lee De Forest, Thomas Edison, and Nikola Tesla, as well as the unnamed Paris Correspondent and Berlin Correspondent provided reports on television, wireless telephony, and the use of novel electrical apparatuses in film and theatrical productions, each of which would go into a great degree of technical detail.[1]
        But the hallmark of the magazine became its more speculative articles, those that were willing to extrapolate fantastic scenarios out of the technical details at hand.  The first published in this vein was “Harnessing the Ocean,” a boosterish piece in the December 1908 issue claiming that “electricity is the fuel of the future,” provided we can find a way to convert the earth’s tides into electric power.[1]  Six months later, Gernsback wrote an article on what would become one of his favorite topics over the next few decades, “Signaling to Mars,” which detailed the conditions that would have to obtain in order for Earth to send messages via wireless telegraph to the red planet.  The quantitative description of the transmitting apparatus in terms of its necessary output (70,000 kilowatts) and best time of year to signal (summer) only constitutes one aspect of this scenario.  Gernsback goes on to take into account the nature of Martian intelligence that would be necessary for such a communicative circuit to be completed:  “we can only hope that the Martians are further advanced than we and may signal back to us, using a method new to us and possibly long discarded by them, when thousands of years ago they stopped signaling to us, and gave us up, as we did not have intelligence enough to understand.”[2]  Continuing in the tradition of Percival Lowell and William Henry Pickering — the latter of whom offered a similar proposal on the front page of The New York Times to communicate with Mars using a series of mirros[3] — the supposition of Martian technology (or biology, or ecology) provided a topos upon which readers might asses the direction of its terrestrial analogues.
	For the readers of Modern Electrics, the technical context in which this highly speculative article appeared only lent credence to the idea that first contact was right around the corner.  In the copy of this issue at Princeton University’s Firestone Library, someone inserted a newspaper clipping (now a permanently affixed leaf within the bound volume) that tells of a new distance record for wireless signaling, from San Francisco to the Pacific Mail Line steamship Korea as it made its way across the ocean.[4]  Left there as if to vouch for the plausibility of the idea that we’ll soon be able to connect with our nearest planetary neighbor, the clipping provides a wonderful sense of how it was people read these magazines.  Though the Gernsback titles eventually became infamous for their sometimes outlandish claims — that electric current might clean us better than water; that the success of a marriage can be predicted using gadgets assembled out of various household supplies — they were always presented through a lens of supposedly scientific rationality.  This frame affected the reception of the magazines by their readers, the design ethos that grew up around them, and the kind of fiction they eventually produced.
        In the Gernsback publications, the capabilities of a given device…

￼
[1] Gernsback, Hugo, “Harnessing the Ocean,” Modern Electrics, vol. 1 no. 9 (December 1908), p. 300-1.
[2] Gernsback, Hugo, “Signaling to Mars,” Modern Electrics, vol. 2 no. 2 (May 1909), p. 49.
[3] “Plans Messages to Mars; Prof. Pickering Would Communicate by Series of Mirrors to Cost $10,000,000,” The New York Times, April 19, 1909, p. 1.
[4] While I haven’t been able to determine the provenance of this particular article, other pieces reporting on the Korea’s distance signaling record were published in the New York Times on November 8, 1909 and the Boston Evening Transcript, November 6, 1909.

￼
[1] See for instance the early report on “Via Wireless,” a theatrical show at Luna Park, Coney Island produced by its founder Frederick Thompson.  “Via Wireless,” Modern Electrics (vol. 1 no. 9, December 1908), 304.

==== re-use ====

This was a formative moment for not only science fiction but media studies itself.  In looking at the ways that amateur experimenter magazines sought to describe and reproduce the estranging effects of new technologies, we will witness the emergence of a critical discourse on media long before it became a topic of academic inquiry.

An excavation of early science fiction has implications not only for science fiction studies (which largely ignore this period in the history of the genre), but also for media studies and the question of the scale at which it begins to select its objects of study.  At what point does the study of media transition from a question of technical specificity to one of cultural form:  the electrical impulse, the circuit, the individual device or its content, the delivery infrastructure, or system standards?

====

(AD-LIB) Many of the Gernsback covers during the War seem to display nothing more than fantasy wish fulfillment -- the idea that we can encase troops in unstoppable steel machines that destroy all enemy targets using radium-powered weapons, or that we could single-handedly end trench warfare by simply rolling along the length of them, dropping bombs with perfect precision using the machine here.

(SAYVILLE COVER)

But for the readers of the Gernsback magazines, these possibilities didn’t seem too far off.  Take for instance the August 1915 issue on the German-owned Sayville, New York wireless telegraph station, which was closed by the U.S. government without comment.  This seemed to be just the latest in a string of government crackdowns on amateur wireless activities, after the Navy had taken control of the airwaves and banned all amateur wireless communications.  It later became clear in the pages of Electrical Experimenter over the next few monthly issues, that a regular reader and contributor to the magazine, Charles Apgar, had devised a means of recording the signals being sent from the station on wax cylinders for the first time -- allowing those messages to be decoded.  They turned out to be relayed from a Nauen station in Germany to U-Boats operated in the Atlantic.  Three months after the sinking of the Lusitania, this was no small feat for an amateur experimenter, and simply seemed to confirm the important role that they were to play in the war.

* * * * * *

In many ways, by putting forward an extra-literary model of science fiction as a kind of experience that arises in the everyday, recent critics are returning to the intellectual core of Suvin’s theory even as they seek to revise it.  The genealogy of Suvin’s concept of “estrangement” lies precisely in such an attempt to account for everyday experience, drawing heavily upon Russian formalist literary critic Viktor Shklovsky’s concept of *ostranenie,* translated most commonly as “defamiliarization.”

For Shklovsky, all art possesses the ability to militate against the habituation of perception, the process by which the monotony of our daily experience causes objects to “retreat into the area of the unconsciously automatic.”  Picking up a hammer for the first time is a completely different experience when one compares it to holding that tool for the ten thousandth time.  Much like Heidegger’s account of the way in which the tool disappears into a work process, some form of exteriorization or distance from that tool is required to understand its essence in any way.

For Heidegger, this occurs when the tool breaks.  But for Shklovsky, it is art that exists to “make the stone stony,” as he puts it.

> The technique of art is to make objects ‘unfamiliar,’ to make forms difficult, to increase the difficulty and length of perception because the process of perception is an aesthetic end in itself and must be prolonged.  Art is a way of experiencing the artfulness of an object: the object is not important.

The end goal of Shklovsky’s reorientation toward objects that have retreated into the invisibility of habit is not to achieve a new kind of knowledge about the object.  For Shklovsky, perception is a process wholly different from knowledge (thus forcing Suvin to modify the Russian formalist account so that it might be used as a descriptor of science fiction, which involves a “cognitive,” or empirical, form of estrangement).  Shklovsky writes, “Defamiliarization is found almost anywhere form is found. […] Its purpose is not to make us perceive meaning, but to create a special perception of the object—it creates a vision of the object instead of serving as a means for knowing it.”  Suvin on the other hand places an emphasis on estrangement as the confrontation of “a set normative system—a Ptolemaic-type closed world picture—with a point of view or glance implying a new set of norms.”  But this confrontation need not be the sole province of literary fiction, with its systematic construction of fictional worlds through narrative means.  Estrangement is simply the process by which any form of aesthetic representation allows us to hold an everyday object at arm’s length, to make it strangely new once again. 

Shklovsky’s ostranenie highlights the aesthetics of what Bernard Stiegler calls “technics and time”:  the temporal frameworks into which we place our tools and the uses to which they have been, are being, and can be put.  Out of this core scene—an object that is made strange to us—an incredible number of literary aesthetics, media theories, and design objectives have been inspired, each of which proceeds from a slightly different temporal framework.

* * * * * *

In some, the newly gained perspective proceeds from some quality of the tool itself (it is broken; it is a fantastic innovation), while in others it is a product of a representation or narrative of that tool.  Such an aesthetic distanciation might proceed from a lengthy process of extended attention, perception, and appreciation, as it does for Shklovsky.  It may also be the product of a spectacular shock or momentary tableau, the latter best exemplified by the Gestus and “alienation effect” of Bertolt Brecht’s epic theater.  The temporal condition of the tool itself is also in question:  the tool might be a well-worn mainstay of the craftsman, marked by the unique imprints of use; it might be a brand new device that promises to change our lives while at the same time exceeding our ability to understand how it works; or it might be an imaginary gadget from the future whose functionality somehow manages to remain legible to us in our newly appreciated historicity.

* * * * * *

But John Onians writes of both “the physical and mental immobility” produced by wonder, clarifying that “To ‘wonder’ is merely to ask oneself a trivial question, but to feel ‘wonder’ is to acknowledge the impact of an extraordinary sensory experience.  Wonder and questioning are certainly closely connected.”

* * * * * *

One interesting phenomenon in this regard is the way in which the new is constructed in advance of any actual encounter with any supposedly unfamiliar object in technological modernity.  Wendy Chun writes that

> Actually using the Internet, for instance, is banal in comparison to its pre-mass usage filmic, televisual, and print representations.  To call X 'new' is to categorize it, to describe and prescribe it, while at the same time to insist that X is wonderful, singular, without opposite or precedent.  This insistence more often than not erases X's previous existence (case in point, the 'discovery' of the 'new world.').

* * * * * *

Wendy Chun, writing on the new as itself “a historical category linked to the rise of modernity” points out that by definition, the new should be a kind of singularity, utterly unexpected and irremediable, an experience that exceeds any known analog.

> the new should have no precedent, should break with the everyday, and thus should be difficult, if not impossible to describe.  If something is new -- that is known or made for the first time -- then we should, according to Descartes in his influential definition of the new, fall into a passionate state of wonder or surprise.”

For science fiction to represent the new, then, presents a paradox.  Without a rhetorical framework within which to project and make sense of the new, it would never become legible to us in the first place.

But the way in which science fiction challenges us to imagine the fantastic through things at hand is what provides it with its productive potential for new forms of knowledge about our world.  As Frederic Jameson argues, science fiction’s “deepest vocation is over and over again to demonstrate and to dramatize our incapacity to imagine the future,” radical difference, otherness, or Utopia.

====

So the title of this book project is *Gadgetry: New Media and the Fictional Imagination,* and it is a cultural history of the gadget as a particular *genre* of technology.  Gadgets include both actual tools you can hold in your hand and perform certain actions with (we can look around this room right now, or root through our pockets, and come up with some devices we would call gadgets), but they include fictional devices as well: the word can serve as a kind of placeholder for a tool that hasn't been invented yet, or is entirely fantastic.  The gadget is an object that lives a curiously double life as both a functional and fictional device.

What makes the gadget an important and understudied topic in the cultural history of media technologies is the fact that its fundamental instrumentality changes from decade to decade.  Though the word "gadget" is a sort of empty container for any object whatsoever, the shape of that container changes drastically from its origins in late nineteenth century nautical jargon to its present day association with mobile media.  The functionality of the gadget is redefined for the material needs and fictional desires of each new era.

====

